Instructor: Let's create
a looping musical transition
between two sections
in a song in EarSketch.
Our looping transition
is going to repeat
a single sound over
and over and over again
that will gradually repeat
that sound faster and faster
and faster making
the sound itself
shorter and shorter
and shorter.
This will build up excitement
and tension as we move
into a new section of music.
This is what it will sound like.
[electronic beat starting slow,
becoming faster]
You can also hear
the sound effect
that we added
on track three here—
that swooshing sound
during the second half
of the transition.
So the function that we wrote
in EarSketch to do this
is called transition()
and it takes one argument,
"starting measure."
In this case, it's being called
with a starting measure of 13.
And it in turn calls a function
called easyLoops() four times.
Now I'll look at easyLoops()
itself in just a minute,
but first let's look at how
these function calls work.
So easyLoops() takes
three arguments.
The first one is
a starting measure,
the second one is
an ending measure,
and the final one
is a sound duration.
And it will just repeat
that sound over and over again
for that duration
from starting measure
until ending measure.
So as an example,
the first time we call here—
our starting measure,
well that's 13,
our ending measure
is starting measure + 2,
so that's 13 + 2 or 15.
And our sound duration is 0.5,
so a half a measure long.
So what's that—
what that is going to do
is it's going to put
the sound at measure 13
and measure 13.5,
at measure 14,
and at measure 14.5.
So it will repeat it four times.
The next time
we go through this
we're calling startMeasure+2,
so that will start
at measure 15,
ending at startMeasure+3,
so that's measure 16.
But now our duration is 0.25.
So if we think about that,
then it's going to be
measure 15, 15.25, 15.5,
and 15.75.
The next time through goes
from startMeasure+3,
so measure 16
to measure 16.5.
But again,
it's gotten even shorter.
And the next time
we do it from measure—
startMeasure+3.5
to startMeasure+4
and it gets even shorter.
And the final call
in this transition() function
is the fitMedia() call
with places that swoosh sound
on track three for the
second half of that transition.
Now let's go over to
the easyLoops() function itself
and see how it's implemented.
So again like I said,
we take a startMeasure
and endMeasure,
and a step size—
that's the duration
of the sound as we're
stepping through this—
and there's
a for loop inside here.
Our loop counter
is called "measure."
It starts at startMeasure.
It ends when we get—
the loop ends
when we get to endMeasure.
And each time
we go through the loop
we increase measure by "step."
So again, let's go back
and kind of think through
how this works when we call it.
Where measure,
our startMeasure is 13—
our endMeasure is 15
and our step is 0.5.
So the first time
we do the loop,
measure is going to equal 13.
So then we're going
to call fitMedia()
to start at measure—
which is 13—
and end at measure + step.
So that's 13 + 0.5, or 13.5.
The next time we call this,
measure will be incremented
by steps and now measure
is 13 + 0.5 which is 13.5.
And our fitMedia() call
will then go from measure 13.5
to 13.5 + 0.5 which equals 14.
The next time through,
measure will be 13.5 + 0.5
which is 14.
So fitMedia() will then
go from 14 to 14.5.
And then the final time
through it will be 14 + 0.5
which equals 14.5
so fitMedia() will go
from 14.5 to 15.
At that point,
measure will equal
14.5 + 0.5 equals 15
which equals our end measure,
so the loop will stop.
So that's how
the for loop in fitMedia() work.
Stepping through the music,
step by step, bit by bit,
putting whatever duration
of the sound we are looking for
onto the track
at the right time.
Let's take
a quick look now
at the rest of the script
to see how it works.
At the beginning we have
init() and setTempo() as always.
And we defined beatStrings
and Sounds as variables.
Then is the easyLoops() function
which we just looked at.
We have section1(),
the first section of music.
We have some fitMedia() calls
and for loops in there.
Then we have
the transition() function
which we already looked at.
And the section2(),
this is what we're transitioning
into where we have
some for loops and fitMedia()
and makeBeat() calls.
Then we call
the various functions:
section1(), transition(),
and section2().
And there's a final little
fitMedia() call here
with a kind of ending
to the song—
one more little wobble sound
that's inserted at the very end.
Then some effects.
We mix the tracks
by changing the volume
on 2 and 3,
lowering their gain.
And then we also have
a filter sweep here on track 2,
which creates a gradual filter
sweep between measures 1 and 5.
And then we call finish().
Let's go ahead and run
this full script now
and listen to the results.
[electronic bass
and drum groove]
Now the transition.
[beat speeds up]
[wooshing noise]
[beat changes
to a more rapid beat]
[music beat continuing to play]